---
layout: post
title:  "Ketosis"
date:   2014-10-14 12:17:18 -0600
categories: writing
short: Metallic taste in mouth for a day. Flu-like symptoms this past weekend. Under 50g grams of carbohydrates in my food for the last 2 weeks. And now I'm in ketosis.
---
Metallic taste in mouth for a day. Flu-like symptoms this past weekend. Under 50g grams of carbohydrates in my food for the last 2 weeks. And now I'm in ketosis.

Ketosis is when your body switches from using glucose to ketones as a primary fuel source. Ketones are a class of chemicals produced by the liver as it breaks down fat. Basically, ketosis is burning fat as fuel instead of sugar. Though most people are sugar-burners, everyone is capable of entering ketosis. All you have to do is eat a diet which is low in carbohydrates and high in fat. My lunch was a huge salad with olive oil, sardines, eggs, and an avocado. It's a delicious way to eat.

The only setback is if you haven't been in ketosis for awhile then your body experiences a bit of a shock as it retools its cellular machinery to be efficient at burning fat. Some people don't get it bad, in fact the first time I did keto, I had no symptoms. This time around, I had a pretty bad weekend of headaches. I relieved them using vegetable broth and salt (keto voodoo) but it wasn't until I woke up this morning that I felt 100%.

I hope this experiment will be worth the uncomfortable transition period. The first time I used it successfully was for 2 months this winter when I was training for ultramarathons. Now that I'm not putting in ultramilage, I'm experimenting with it for its mental clarity aspect, making it ironic that I suffered through headaches this weekend. That's hopefully just a one off thing which will be well worth curing that chronic foggy feeling, especially around 2 to 4 in the afternoon. You know, your thoughts feel fuzzy, you forget the things people told you a minute ago or the task you were doing, and you sit in front of your computer like a zombie. From personal experience, I can say that those are usually my least productive hours of the day. When your body is in ketosis, your blood sugar levels remain extremely stable throughout the day so that feeling of a crash shouldn't happen. 

So I hope.
