---
layout: post
title:  "Startup Term Week 5"
date:   2015-04-26 12:13:14 -0600
categories: knox
short: During the last term of my undergraduate education, I didn't take any classes. Instead, I sold locally grown produce to the Galesburg community. Here's part of that story.
---
I don't intend this to be a post about tech-y things, so bear with the next sentences.

The way I write this blog is a little embarrassing for the programmer part of me. I don't use any fancy frameworks, preprocessors, or out of the box solutions like tumblr. Actually, it's just plain html that I edit in a (very pretty-looking) text editor. Of course, this is bound to change. I recently learned how to use heroku, a cloud based web-hosting service that syncs nicely with git and that allows me to push my Ruby on Rails app to deployment with very few changes from my local environment. The best part about heroku, is that it's free, and in my final term at Knox, it's all about free things and OPM.

This post is really to recap my experience with Startup Term. An experimental, immersive entrepreneurial term that is the baby of the CS and Business departments. My team is one four teams selected to bring a business off the ground in a 10-week intensive. We get office space (donated), computers (borrowed), and coffee (gifted) and in return we have to produce the foundations of a business. After doing hardcore research and CS-y things for the last two terms, I wasn't ready for such a dramatic change of pace.

See, I like coding, but I also like food. And that's our business: food. When we got selected for the term, the idea was that we would start the foundations of a food hub which is basically a service which aggregates the produce of several small farms and distributes it to consumers or wholesale buyers (though most that we talked to do consumers (margins or something like that)). My naivete was quickly exposed on two fronts. One being that we should hold to the ideals of organic farming. I'm a liberal arts student so naturally I'm all about permaculture, organic, pastured-livestock, and I only eat fruits picked by virgins in the moonlight. How surprising it was to learn that most of the vegetable producers in the area are conventional. Some even till the soil (even the big industrial corn/soy producers stopped tilling). I had to temporarily silence the idealist inside of me and accept that locally grown food was the #1 priority and organic-no-spray-vegan-health-stuff can come later. The second, and probably the bigger lesson for the programmer in me is that just because you can build something doesn't mean people will use it.

I mentioned Ruby on Rails earlier. The way I originally saw this term, was that it was meant to be my first experience doing back-end programming. So for the first couple of weeks, I was all set on designing features for our website and implementing them one by one. Sign-up, login, persistent sessions, user accounts, vendor accounts, you name it. Then the realization: there's a million websites that do exactly the same thing we're doing and some of them even appear to do it well. Especially relevant to Galesburg is a competitor who happens to be run by Knox College's sustainability coordinator's husband. Oops, should have looked into that one earlier. So that was were we stood at the beginning of last week: hopelessly developing something which we would have an impossible time marketing, and whose competitors have already taken the local business.

But wait, it gets better, and I'll write about it some other time :)