---
layout: post
title:  "Graduate School as an Investment"
date:   2015-12-16 12:17:18 -0600
categories: madison
short: I pretend to be an economist as I reflect on my first term in phd-school. I had some suprises which might be explained by casting it in this light.
---

I have now finished a semester at UW-Madison. What I'd like to reflect on today is why I'm here. I'm also going to write with the air of an economist who is highly trained from Econ101 in high school and the few <a href="http://freakonomics.com/radio/freakonomics-radio-podcast-archive/">freakanomics</a> podcasts I've listened to in the car.

Some background about me as a masters student. I work as a research assistant in the databases group for 20 hours a week. This pays for my tuition, and I receive a stipend which is enough to pay for rent, beer, and all my little bills. I take 2 classes a semester, and if I take a total of 8 courses, some of which must be at a grad level, then I receive a masters degree. If I take a qualifying exam, I can continue into the PhD track. The PhD route takes 5-7 years. I am here because I'm hungry to learn more.

Some background about the grads. In my class there are about 30 American students and about 100 other nationalities. Forty of us are professional masters students. Many students have worked prior to returning to University for their masters or PhD. Jobs abroad generally do not pay as well as in the United States and getting an education in the US can make it easier to be employeed here afterwards. However, studying and living abroad is hard, many students miss their friends and family back home, and travel back home during the breaks.

Some background about the CS department. Students are essentially a source of income and CS at UW Madison is under budget constraints. By taking more students, they get more money. UW Madison recently started taking many more students, especially those in the 'professional masters' (PM) program. This essentially means PMs take classes and they or their company pays the tuition bill. Undergraduates are also surging into the department, <a href="http://www.jsonline.com/news/education/as-demand-for-data-skills-grows-big-gift-bolsters-uw-computer-sciences-b99620344z1-356457911.html">admissions have almost doubled</a> in the last five years.

Okay, so the background is there because it sets up the pieces of the puzzle and here is what I think is going on. American students graduate and probably have debt, making graduate school an unattractive option. This is especially considering that you're likely to find a job with a STEM degree and that these jobs likely have starting salaries between 60-100. In fact, starting salaries for a Bachelors, Masters, and Doctorate in CS are not so different from one another. If you were in it purely for the money, it appears that industry experience is more lucrative than education. I'm not as sure about the motivations of international students. I'm guessing that the CS department here is bursting at the seams with new international students because not a lot of Americans want to forgo earning potential. Also, international students are subject to higher tuition and more fees than their American counterparts, therefore increasing student intake is good for UW's balance sheet. My guess is that my international classmates come from well-to-do families who can afford having their child abroad or these students have worked first and saved themselves for the opportunity. 

Now we (kind of) (sort of) (maybe) know the department's motivations, the American college graduate's motivations, and the international student's motivations. So, am I, a born-and-raised American white dude, doing something stupid by forgoing work for more school (17th grade!) ? Well, it's pretty obvious that I didn't come to Madison for the money because I could have gone and worked. I like learning, simple as that.

If units of learning were a currency, am I getting the most out of UW? My experience so far has been mixed. The CS department feels crowded which is bad for the quality of education. I've heard and experienced that classes get easier when there's more students than the professor can alot time for individually. Additionally, intense group discussion becomes impossible after a point. On the other hand, I'm doing interesting research in the databases field, I get to work with smart people, and I'm finding the CS classes at University more challenging and in-depth than at my undergraduate and this is exactly why I signed up.