---
layout: post
title:  "Startup Term Week 10"
date:   2015-05-26 12:13:14 -0600
categories: knox
short: During the last term of my undergraduate education, I didn't take any classes. Instead, I sold locally grown produce to the Galesburg community. Here's a continuation of that story.
---

Last Friday, my startup team stood in front of a group of seven investors who wanted to learn why our business was going to succeed. It was nerve-racking, partly because the coffee I've been drinking leaves me a little TwEaKy for the morning, and partly because everyone was wearing suits while I had on Vans, black jeans, and a white nylon dress shirt that I bought at REI. Hardly formal.

We started the pitch off with an intro video. The crowd loved it. God, our graphic designer, Angel, really pulled through on that one. Upbeat music, cheery voice, simple explanation of the customer value of [Farmet](https://www.farmet.co). I sort of forgot the rest of the pitch at that point, up until the part where we had to field the tough questions. We got absolutely grilled on a couple of points (no SSL! that box looks like crap!). Criticism aside, we got a ton of useful, actionable feedback which will certainly find its way into the site and our business (SSL for example, was added this weekend). After shaking hands and leaving the tiny, glass-walled conference room, we regrouped. I found that I was shaking a little.

Startup term has been incredibly valuable, and for unexpected reasons. Seriously, I used to get all giddy when I had to make a call to someone I didn't know. Since this is my personal blog, I'm not going to go into the resume-stuff here, but rather talk about a little about what I learned. Basically, following your passion is fun. Seriously, I thought my passion was good, farmer's-market quality produce. Turns out I like building the backend of web applications. Don't get me wrong, I have loved driving out to Western Illinois farms and listening to 4th and 5th generation Illinois farmers talk about their history and their farm. I have loved getting tours of fields and being handed heads of fresh lettuce with an explanation of their origin. I've also loved talking with our clients while taking orders, and learning a little about personal selling from our charity correspondent, Jim. I've throughly enjoyed this term, but at the end of the day, I keep coming back to the website and thinking, "how can I make this better" and then trying to make it better (PS I think it's crap right now, but it's way less crap than 3 weeks ago and that's what's important). So even though the term has ended and I'm a college graduate (woohoo) there's still plenty to grow with Farmet.

Now, to stop tooting my horn (and probably [puckering my lips](/guitar/2015/05/10/pucker-lips.html)) I'll say that our first delivery of fresh produce to our customers is Wednesday. 'Jugdement Day' as Angel called it. I certainly hope we're prepared.