---
layout: post
title:  "Avida"
date:   2015-01-27 15:37:16 -0600
categories: tech
short: Avida is a life simulation program which attempts to model evolution. This week I decided to research Avida and its capabilities as part of the Distributed AI independent study.
---
Avida is a life simulation program which attempts to model evolution. This week I decided to research Avida and its capabilities as part of the Distributed AI independent study.

I had heard of evolution simulation programs before; in particular, a program called sugarscape. Sugarscape's agents are simple. They either like collecting sugar or spice from their environment. The game is turned based and at each turn agents look at their stocks of goods and determine which resource is more urgently needed. They then look around them to find the patch of land with the most of their resource and then harvest at that site. There are additional rules to simulate life such as mating, changing seasons, inheritance, and pollution but the point is the simulation is pretty simple and governed by (mostly) deterministic rules. Like Game of Life, the agent's rules are simple but the large scale behavioral patterns end up being complex and reflect group behaviors of real world organisms.

Sugarscape models life by abstracting key aspects of life and programming them into its organisms. Mating, Bartering, and Gathering are all concepts that make sense for organisms in a physical world but from the perspective of a digital organism is incongruent with its desire. Wait-program's desire? Programs are just machines so we're asking what a machine desires? Now this is sort of a roughly philosophical question we're asking and therefore its answers must be reconciled with a bit of imagination but in my sparse research I found that there are at least two artificial evolution programs that answer this question. If not flesh, what would a virtual organism be composed of? Code. If not food, what would a virtual organism need to metabolize? CPU time.

Tierra and Avida both model organisms from the DNA level. Instead of acid/base pairs, they use assembly-like instructions. Each piece of code primarily exists to reproduce itself. Researchers design computing environments where certain operations are rewarded as to evolve organisms that solve specific computational tasks such as equality. Avida has given researchers evidence to support everything from the importance of sexual reproduction to the importance of limited resources in evolving efficient organisms.

Researching it this week, I've only scratched the surface of evolving programs and I intend to research this further and actually get this program up and running.
