---
layout: post
title:  "Dream Journal from 2/9"
date:   2016-02-09 05:17:18 -0600
categories: ideas
short: 
---

I was trying to sleep. I was on a creaky bed in the middle of an apartment where the windows from the street lights revealed hardwood floor and walls lined with bookcases. Everything was cast in a black and white palette.

I was tossing and turning. Fearful of something. Fear was amplifying the sound of the floor fans which were placed liberally around the room. All of them different and all of them the kind whose head swiveled back and forth. They didn't actually produce any noise or any wind. Still and quiet, I peered out from the light sheet that was over my body, staring at the door. 

Realizing this was a dream, I feel asleep in that dream to dream. In this inner dream, I found a gun and reckless courage. I popped back into the outer dream and ran bezerk out into the hall. I flew past more doors and burst into a kitchen room, also cast in the black and white light of the city streets at night. Finding nothing and nobody, I calmed down, turned back, and went back to my room. Feeling braver, I walked around, examining the guitars which were placed in the back of the room. Some were hand-made and rough. A melody started repeating in the music track part of my brain but I had a feeling that it would be irreverent to play then and so I put it back down.

Curiosity and inspiration overtook my desire for rest and now I was left wondering. The tune continued to play loudly. What to do next. I popped out into the waking layer and got up, left my bedroom and got a notebook. I started writing this very story down, feeling like I was answering some long ignored question. Instead of running away from these dreams and thoughts, I embraced them. I wanted to know what I thought of me.

Now I am in a bind. I am using the waking machinery to write and think and in sense I am lying. I want to report mostly from the dream self but this mode is betraying those feelings.

But Oh voice from the deep, speak once more through me so we can make appear these thoughts from the briny vulnerable depth of dreams. Did I run away from feeling the narrative? Ignoring expression. Did I leave mental jobs in the queue? Maybe it's all fermenting. Or, maybe they shrunk and were tossed like a floppy head of lettuce. What is the nature of the program I am running? Why did it reincarnate desk fans and bookcases? From where did the feeling of fear germinate? Why do I pick up instruments, put them down, and only then hear music?

