---
layout: post
title:  "Robbed"
date:   2016-11-19 06:00:00 -0600
categories: life
draft: false
short: Ever been robbed? Someone got my debit card information. What they spent my money on made me livid.
---
Ever been robbed? Someone got my debit card information. What they spent my money on made me livid.

____
I'm not a vegetarian, but I do have standards about the quality and source of meat I buy. This is very important to me. Supporting local businesses which are stewards of our environment and our health is an investment. 

Wait, how is this related to being robbed? Oh yes, half the purchases the fraudsters made were meat! What the hell? Who steals a debit card and spends over three thousand dollars on meat? How can you even spend three thousand dollars on meat? Plus, it was, as far as I can tell, industrial, feedlot, corn-fed, and adulterated meat. That made me mad. I feel like I am splurging every time I buy local cuts from the co-op, and here's this guy who goes and spends my entire food budget for a year on the wrong stuff. Jez- next time you rob me, at least have the decency to order some free-range, pastured stuff.

Now here's where things got weird. Being a dirty bachelor, I haven't yet bought all the normal things you typically find in a comfortable home. This includes, plates, a table, seating, and a vacuum. Wanting to clean up, I have been looking on craigslist for a used vacuum (I'm pretty cheap). When I saw that my fraudster bought a 600 dollar vacuum, I was not only spooked but pissed that this guy spent more than 10x what I was willing to pay when it was my money which was being spent. Think about it, he could have bought 10 reasonable second hand vacuums! It's like he looked at my web history and bought stuff to taunt me. First the meat, then the vacuum. Who knows, if the bank hadn't detected the anomalous purchases, he probably would have made donations ISIS or something.

If the cops get this guy, I want to see a picture of his apartment. I just imagine a very clean carpet, a great set of knives, and thirteen fridges filled with meat. And some ISIS flags. Also, when they catch him, his punishment should be to read *The Omnivore's Dilemma*, *Eating Animals*, and every book written by Joel Salatin. I'll even pay for the books! I'd like to support those authors and their ideas, especially if it can manipulate my frauster.

By the way, those are great books. I just think a lot of people would balk at being forced to read. 

On the bright side, this experience taught me to never again feel like I am spending too much on meat. I mean, until I start needing a second fridge.

____
**Update** I think the guy may have gotten my card information from a string of gas station skimmers installed around Madison. I saw [this list](http://www.wkow.com/story/33080286/2016/09/Tuesday/debit-credit-card-skimmers-found-at-wisconsin-gas-stations) and recall having gone to at least three of the places mentioned in the past year. [This article](http://www.channel3000.com/news/2-arrested-in-connection-with-gas-pump-skimmer-investigations/42545050) doesn't feature pictures of the thieves' meat lockers, but at least they got the guys!

____
**Update 2**
This experience made me realize that I needed to learn to put my savings somewhere other than a checkings account. So I started reading up on investing. I'll [record the books I've read](/reading) on this topic, and maybe some experience as I make investing decisions for the loads of cash I make as a grad student.
