---
layout: post
title:  "Interning @ Pivotal"
date:   2016-08-31 12:17:18 -0600
categories: work
short: I operated on an ORCA this summer. How about living in California, is it overrated?
---
Forewarning, I'm going to ramble for two paragraphs.

California is overrated. At least until you get back into the midwest and realize that winter is going to suck. Actually, with all I've been reading about global warming, I don't think winter will be so much of an issue. In fact, it's probably better that I wait it out a few more years here. I mean, what's going to happen to all that overpriced Bay Area real estate which is just inches above sea level? I've smelled south bay and I would not like that near my house, let alone lapping up alongside my bed. Sea levels man, only Poseidon knows.

Well I for one would much rather live out in the sticky hot summers, and these precious few remaining winters that make sitting indoors looking out the window at the cold more satisfying than it should be. Because, as my grandpa used to say, 'This too shall pass'. Except that he had a habit of saying that during the good times. Leave it to people from Siberia to dwell so much on winter that they can only relate to good things by reminding themselves about how they are fleeting experiences soon to be replaced by a sort of misery. Though it's the misery which is to be endured, and which we are supposed to derive some kind of satisfaction which people from California will probably never understand.

Yeah, so is California overrated? Nah, working there was fun.

I got to work with Pivotal's data team. I mostly worked on Greenplum, a distributed version of postgres database. It's actually a pretty cool design. The idea is that each node is an instance of postgres with its own portion of the database. The master node slices up a query, attaches information about how the nodes will talk to each other, and then sends off the query to all the worker nodes. I actually worked on ORCA, the optimizer. There's a bunch of different ways to execute a query and it's the optimizer's job to find the best way. Query optimizers are tricky to build and even trickier in the distributed environment because of the added considerations of optimizing for communication and redistribution of data.

Because Greenplum is a mature product, the majority of work on the database, database tooling, and query optimizer products is not thrusting in a research direction. However, my project manager carved out what I felt like was a substantial intern project that exposed me to the guts of ORCA, the query optimizer for Greenplum database. I wrote about the technical details of my internship on [Pivotal's engineering blog](http://engineering.pivotal.io/post/making-ORCA-smarter/). Here I'll write a little about Pivotal's style.

The first thing that I was amazed about was that Pivotal has very small, and very talkative teams. Okay, so coming from a university where my research is mainly done in long silent stretches, having people constantly talking all around you in an open office space was kind of a relief. I mean, half the reason I pay a couple bucks to sit in a coffee shop is purely to get away from the lack of noise in the comp sci department. Plus I never had to pay for coffee at Pivotal. No, there were more sources of free caffeine than my self-restraint could handle. So aside from being mildly jittery all summer, there was a great deal more conversation (both about tech and whatever else). I think this sort of atmosphere is great.

Another thing Pivotal did which was unlike most software companies was to aggressively practice paired programming. In this model, there are two programmers per computer. Most of the times you'll be sitting physically next to your pair, but working with a remote pair isn't uncommon. It is a fantastic way to introduce new programmers to a codebase if your more senior people are willing to slow down and explain step by step their process and understanding of the code. On that end, I have to thank Jesse, Venky, Haishang, Omer, and everyone else I worked with. I would say that, if both the individuals don't have experience in a particular part of the code, I found pairing to be less effective because my style of reading code is very jumpy. 

Okay, I don't feel much like writing about tech right now so let me just say one thing before I leave. Eat vegetables. There, I said it. Now don't hold it against me, but I think most people don't eat enough green things. And none of that powdered bullshit I see in the grocery stores, all front and center in those popup displays telling you to mix their grainy freeze dried leaf dust into your otherwise delicious, fresh smoothie. Nah, just eat your vegetables like god intended: drenched in butter. That's all.
