---
layout: post
title:  "Fasting"
date:   2016-01-16 12:17:18 -0600
categories: health
short: I <3 fasting. It's free. It kills cancer. What more could you want?
---

Not eating is great. You don't have to cook, you don't have to clean up, you don't even have to buy food, or anything else really. Fasting is fantastic. I feel f-ing great and all I've done is skip breakfast.

In the past, I've done full-day fasts and found it to be a major mental challenge. I would cordon off a specific day, prepare the night before by meditating and planning out the next day, and then spend the next day feeling like I had to avoid people at meal times all the while feeling vaguely pissed off. That is not holy, that's not fun. I will say that the one time I made full day fasts work was one summer in college which I spent in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan taking care of sled dogs. I had an off day on the weekend and it was warm outside so fasting in the sunshine with a book was incredibly relaxing. Unfortunately, now it's winter and not every day is a day off.

Intermittent fasting is the every-man's approach to fasting. You skip breakfast, then eat lunch and dinner in an 8 hour window, giving your body the benefit of a 16 hour fast. It allows enough time for eating substantiative meals. Also, you don't have to avoid meals with friends. It wasn't a huge lifestyle change for me to not make eggs in the morning, that I can do it every day. 

Well, actually, it's a little difficult at first. I found that for the first 3 days of intermittent fasting, I was tired around lunch and it took a full meal for me to perk up again. But man, was it worth it. Basically, I've only been doing this for 2 weeks now, so this is by no means a long term study but in the short term I have become inexplicably happy and full of energy. Like really happy. Like so happy I think something is wrong and that my roommate spiked my food with coke or something.

Check it out, at any time during the day, <a href="http://neurosciencestuff.tumblr.com/post/38271759345/gut-instincts-the-secrets-of-your-second-brain">95% of serotonin</a> in your body is in your gut. Seriously, the impact of keeping your gut healthy should not be ignored because so much of our experience is colored by, basically, what you eat. I'm a big believer in all the gut health stuff that's in <a href="http://fatburningman.com/cod-liver-oil-a-surprising-secret-to-a-sexy-smile-and-gorgeous-skin/">health podcasts</a>, and more recently the mainstream news. However, being somewhat of a scientist, I have to hold it to myself to go and experiment, and account the results. 

So what the heck? Why do I feel so good. I didn't change my exercise, my work habits, or the foods I eat. If anything this break (it's UW Madison's winter break for another 3 days) has been boring, and a little lonely. I should be depressed. Instead, in two weeks I've:
*  Feel absolutely amazing mentally. Mainly I feel clear-headed, and joyful. 
*  Lost a little fat on my belly. I'm not one to have abs but now if I flex, I can pretend.
*  Improved my mood, even if the first few days sucked
*  Appreciate food more. The best garnish for a meal is hunger. In general, I've noticed I feel more thankful, and not even just for food.

Since I'm not entirely convinced that my mood is the result of intermittent fasting, I'm going to update this post in a few weeks. By then the semester will have started and having my normal responsibilities on top of classes may tick down my mood. For some reason, I don't think that will be the case however.

**Update 24 Jan 2016**

This week was more difficult. Classes started and so I don't have the luxury of cooking lunch. I've been eating salads with lots of oil and avocado for energy during lunch, and then cooking vegetarian dinners. What I noticed is that I would still be hungry after dinner and would eat really marginal foods like Clif bars and sweets. From what I read about Soy on the <a href="http://www.westonaprice.org/soy-alert/">Weston A Price foundation</a> website, it's worth considering dropping soy-containing foods like Clif bars or most processed foods from any diet.

When fasting, the body allocates energy to doing tasks which it would otherwise allocate towards digestion [<a href="http://www.amazon.com/Fasting-Eating-Health-Medical-Conquering/dp/031218719X">a good overview</a>]. Maybe this experience is related: I have an acne scar on my chin from sometime during high school. On Tuesday, I noticed that it became red and inflamed. Over the next few days, the inflammation went down and now the scar is smaller than before. I suspect that if I didn't cut it while shaving yesterday, that it would have gone away completely. If the body is capable of healing on the surface, I can't help but think that my internal organs are also benefiting from the time off digestion. Maybe if I were more in tune with the workings of my body I could report 20% better pancreatic function or something! Alas, I'm not that disciplined on the meditation cushion to gain ultimate subtlety of awareness.

This next week, I'm going to try to load up on more fats during dinner which for vegetarian meals means more sour cream, butter drenched vegetables, and nuts ands seeds and oils in salads. Hopefully then, I won't go back to my Clif bar habit (at one point, I would eat two or three of those things a day).