---
layout: post
title:  "Drove to California"
date:   2016-05-21 05:17:18 -0600
categories: life
short: Drove from Chicago to San Fransisco. This is a reflection on driving with a stranger.
---

Drove from Chicago to San Fransisco.

This is the end of a car journey. It took four days.

My brain feels a little rattled and I could probably use a walk, or bike ride, as that seems more befitting here. It's been a short few days driving long miles.

It was nice to have unexpected company. A friend had linked me on a facebook post written by Sejal, another first year grad student who needed to get out to California. We didn't know each other.

We made the trip in three nights, four days. 

Day one was awkward. Well first few hours were awkward. I mean, how are introductions supposed to pan out after meeting at 5 in the morning? The answer, in my case, was the generics: school history, internship history, work history. Insert every class taken in the last 3 years here.

I did my background research, so although Sejal's course history was new information for me, I reckoned what the experience might be like. She had a sparse post history on her facebook wall. Her degree focus is extremely technical. Her responses to facebook messages were spuradic. In other words, we were very similar from that angle. I figured that the odds we'd have decent conversation, and our mannerisms and interests would be the same were pretty good. Though supposing that I was wrong, then those 12 hour stretches in the car next to each other would be a fairly strong lesson in learning to meet a person face to face before agreeing to travel together.

I forget everything we talked about on the first day. Friendly noise, I think, is the term for our conversations. 

We ended that day in Omaha, of which we explored their vibrant Whole Foods, and charming Comfort Inn whose front sliding door sounded like some kind of broken warp drive from a space movie. Seriously though, Omaha's waterfront was nice- we had the afternoon to walk around, take pictures, and look for food. In the evening, Andrew, another intern making the drive, joined us. We split the room.

I discovered Andrew has an eerily similar media diet as I do: same podcasts, books, philosophies. It made for good conversation. Rarely do I meet people who process this stuff. Maybe a precursor to the technocrats here in the bay area.

Second day on the road and I chose to turn on Modern Romance, read by the author himself, Azize Ansari. Despite being written by a comedian, it is surprisingly factual. Did I want the sexual tension that only can occur when two strangers listen to a romantically-themed audiobook together on a car ride that will force them to be together for the next 76 hours, like it or not? 

Yes. Because I was bored of the relationship I had primarily been fostering this past year, that being with this laptop.

Second day we stopped in Rock Springs, Wyoming. I don't think I embarrassed myself too badly by swinging on monkey bars at a local park where we walked around a fitness trail. The hanging unfurls hands which have clamped to a pulling steering wheel all day. It felt good. They should install these at truck stops.

The monkey bars and walks were delibrate. Driving long distance is an endurance event similar to running. You start in the morning, your mind fully aware that the task in front of you will take your concentration for the next 12 odd hours, including the stretch breaks. All decision-making becomes easy. If it will help you make it to the end, then do it. Speed is always second to endurance. Or maybe third, because happiness is bubbling up near the top. Either way, you must focus on fueling your body, and staying stretched and loose. You can last a few hours with poor form but longer events require  discipline.

On the second night I set my alarm for the central timezone and consequently woke up early on the third day. The sky was still dark, so I realized my mistake as soon as I got outside to jog, but my mind had already spun up. We had stayed in Green River, Wyoming. It's a train depot along I80. I ran across a pedestrian bridge that spanned the switching yard and watched the trains starting up. The sun was rising over a butte. At six thirty, I went into the old-style stainless steel diner near to the hotel to get coffee. Some drunken cowboys stumbled in and talked loudly about their evening. I sipped the weak coffee that the waiter kept pouring, and listened.

Sejal and I talked about lottery tickets and chance. There's a chance you'll win money with a ticket. By taking a chance on these kinds of trips, you also stand to win something. How could I not feel grateful for this odd little experience.

The first part of the third day went smoothly despite running on five hours of sleep. I got coffee in Salt Lake City and felt more conversational. There was a little bit of everything shared between us. The last roadtrip I went on was a 3 hour drive with a roommate from college. We talked about movies, tv, pop politics. Friendly noise. Here, we delved briefly into religion, diet, and past relationships. If I sit next to you for three days, and have an image of you in stereotypes, I want to challenge them. Sorry Sejal, pardon my bluntness. I'm used to SQL queries.

The last hour of the third day, approaching Reno Nevada, something caught up with me. It might had been the crappy road trip energy bar diet, or the lack of sleep, or the stress of 10 hours in a car approaching its end of life, or the emotionally charged music that was playing down the windy hills to Reno. My mind went into low power mode. Just watch the road, no verbage chattering in the mind, just watch the road. Certainly don't think about dying in a twisted wreck. Navigating the last 20 minutes to the Harrah's Casino where we got a cheap room was clumsy and I'm glad they built the streets wide and the traffic was thin. When we got to the room, my breath couldn't keep up with me and I lay on the bed, with a pushed-over-the-edge feeling. Physically panicking but mentally sound. I wanted to cry.

These things pass and soon Andrew reached Reno and we got dinner at the hotel restaurant while Sejal rested in the room.

The fourth morning, we chose to relax in the room before going through the Sierra Nevadas and the foothills and finally the flood plains before the bay. We stopped in Davis, my hometown, and did a walk around the path my mom used to lead my brothers and I around in the evenings to expend our infinite kid energy. The neighborhood and park and walking paths were much smaller, and shorter than relative to my memory. That's similar to what I've heard everyone say about the places they saw as a kid. I don't know how this felt for Sejal, but it was sort of an indulgence for me. We sat down by the greenbelt and had leftovers for lunch.

It was a short drive to Palo Alto. My back suspension was completely screwed from the drive through the mountains with their chained-tire worn roads. I abused the car's transmission with poor shifts while looking for Sejal's temporary apartment. The check engine light came on. Considering that the drive had caused the Corolla had consumed more oil than the volume of the engine, I was surprised that it just now turned on. In that sense, I felt lucky.

We hugged and said our goodbyes. She had took a big chance. I wonder what the odds are. Driving away I felt lucky, and a little lost.

I went to a coffee shop and started writing this but felt gross. The car ride had made my head feel like it was moving forward in space while I was sitting. I went to the hills and hiked for a while before going and meeting the family who I am currently renting a small storage room with a bed.

I felt a dread of knowing hardly anyone in a new town, living in a spare room of a family I had found via Craigslist, and starting a new job on monday.

Que sera, sera. 

As I write now, it's okay. Got the oil changed, a carwash, and night of sleep, and mug of coffee. Dread and feelings of depression are often in my case physical. When I write down my thoughts and experiences, reading through them makes me realize that my life is rich and my time is well spent.

--Marc