---
layout: post
title:  "Caffeine"
date:   2016-10-22 06:00:00 -0600
categories: health
draft: false
short: I'm in the process of quitting caffeine. I was surprised to wake up at 4am feeling like I need to run. Here's my experience to quitting the most popular psycho stimulant drug in the world.
---
My eight a.m. classes are usually accompanied with a thermos of artisan coffee which I brew in an aeropress and stir in butter and coconut oil to make bulletproof-style coffee. I thoroughly enjoy everything about the drink. Its smell is intoxicating. The colors of the beans are deeply earthy and warm. The process of grinding beans and stirring them in the press has become a small morning ritual. If you drink it in a hip coffee shop, you'll find interesting people and new music. Come on, who doesn't like a warm drink in the morning?

The reason I quit was because I had a disturbing moment of mental instability. Over the weekend, I was preparing for midterms, and consuming not an all-out excessive amount of caffeine, but between the 3 cups of coffee and a bar of dark chocolate, I found myself wired and unable to get proper sleep. It didn't help that I woke up early on Sunday to prepare for a road race that was happening later that day. Come Monday morning, I couldn't focus during my 8 am class. Instead I was having intense day dreams about the books that I was reading as I was trying to fall asleep the night before. They happened to be about factory farming and government/cooperate farm policy. Unsettling in it's own right, I certainly didn't want to be focusing on the relationship between manure lagoons and misspent taxpayer money while trying to focus on a lecture about concurrency control in a database systems class. In short, I thought I was losing grip on the control of my thoughts, like I couldn't focus on the present moment. Since caffeine, and Theobromine (the chocolate) consumption most likely led to the poor quality of sleep, I decided to quit.

Cold turkey was surprisingly not hard from a willpower standpoint. I still have a half pound of single origin El Salvadorian coffee in my cupboard, but it's not like every time I open the cabinet to grab something, that I look in with regret. 

No, the worst part was the jet-lag feeling, and the back pain. I woke up at 4am on Wednesday with terrible soreness in my lower back and legs. I thought it was because I hadn't gone running in a couple days, so I put on my shoes and got out the door. Nope, got back and still painful. It was a deep soreness, almost like it was coming from the bones. I had trouble sleeping later that night. The only thing that seemed to help was using the foam roller for 20 minutes to massage the area. I read from other blog posts that similar experiences were had. The area is called the sciatica for those of you that are interested. Happily, the pain went away by the evening of the next day. I thought about taking ibuprofen, but because I thought it would be temporary, I just went through it.

The jet-lag feeling and accompanying brain-fog also only lasted about four days. During that time, I worked slower, and couldn't take in all the details of a lecture, but I had a sense of serenity which made the experience feel okay. Even if I felt slow, I felt incredibly present, and that's really what I was hoping for by quitting. I've also slept better over the last few days than I have for a long time. I'd bet that a good deal of the positive effects of quitting come from the increased quality of sleep.

Also, to echo the words of a few other bloggers who also fasted from caffeine, like them, I feel just or more awake than I did with coffee than without it. In particular, I get up feeling really energetic. I mean, on the third day of quitting I got out and ran before the sun came out damn it. 

Like all good addicts, I'll go back to the stuff in due time. But I'm giving this thing a month. For good measure, personal reform needs a month. 

**Three Week Update**

A month! A whole month and no caffeine! It's been very easy after the first week. I sleep better, and thus have more energy during the day. It's also very stable energy. Usually, I'd drink a second cup of coffee after lunch. I think the caffeine put me in a zombie state where I was awake but mentally not functioning because of the digestion crash that ensues after a meal. Now I can ride the crash and come out of the other side awake and alert. On days where I'm really tired, I can close my eyes for a few minutes and then be back up and online for the rest of the afternoon. 

So, what has filled that void which ending the morning ritual of coffee created? Well, I started buying these expensive fermented teas from a health food store. They're called kombucha and they're a Chinese drink made from black tea and a bacteria culture called a scoby. The drink is tart, lightly carbonated, and full of good gut stuff. 

What intrigues me most about kombucha is the feeling it creates. In the past I've taken a supplement called phenibut which increases an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain called GABA. It provides a clear-headed sense of calm. And, I swear, if I spend all morning sipping on a bottle of kombucha, I experience that same sense of calm. I've heard that probiotics can create GABA in the gut so my long-shot hypothesis is that these little kombucha bacterias are creating GABA in my gut.

Hopefully, it's that. There's also a trace amount of alcohol so who knows, maybe I'm just getting a little crooked.

I mentioned that these suckers are expensive- 3.39 a bottle. Coffee was 2 dollars a cup, so this is amounting to an expensive habit. Luckily, I've brewed kombucha before and it's really easy, and really cheap. All you need is a scoby, black tea, sugar, and a fermentation jar. All this comes out to under 20 dollars and so you can make gallons of this wonderful elixir for just a few bucks.

So, next beverage obession: kombucha. Maybe I'll update this post again once I have made a few batches.