---
layout: post
title:  "log: writing an oauth server pt2"
date:   2019-09-14 01:00:00 -0800
categories: work
draft: false
short: Notes on writing the web frameworky part of an oauth server.
---

This is part two of a series. You may want to see [the first post]({% post_url 2019-08-09-log-oauth-1 %}).

____

Now that I have a flexible routing system, I want to focus on the next part: the http to service interface. In other words, I have a class containing the http request context and it needs to be marshalled into a service method call.

So I need to marshal this object

```java
class HttpRequestContext {
  String method;
  String path;
  Map<String,String> pathArgs;
  Map<String,String> queryArgs;
  Map<String,List<String>> headers;
  String body;
}
```

into, say a call to create a Client resource.

```java
class ClientService {
  void createClient(Client c);
}
```

In my experience writing GRPC services, I follow a pattern based on the service classes which the proto compiler hands off to you.

```
MyGrpcServiceImpl --[marshal to POJO ]-> IService
MyGrpcServiceImpl <-[marshal to proto]-- IService
```

In other words, all the Grpc service does is take the proto and marshal it into a plain old java object and pass it into a service interface. It's fairly straightforward and easy to read. Granted, I never liked writing the mundane proto/pojo methods that you seemingly need to write for each unique proto message you've defined.

An alternative approach would be to use annotations to mark-up the service interface and its arguments so a runtime binder can take the http request context and extract the interface's arguments according to the annotations, and do the reverse with the returned object. This works nicely in Spring if you are writing quickly. The problem I've had with this, is that abstraction quickly becomes hard to debug and understand once you need a new feature. Additionally, it feels like something that would be hard to optimize given the dynamic nature of it.

Ultimately, I would like the option to choose per-service which strategy to use: dynamic versus static binding. Maybe some interfaces follow a pretty regular pattern and needn't be uber-performant (like admin interfacs). Dynamic calls could save time. Meanwhile, if I want to write custom marshalling code, I should have that option.

```java
router = 
  Router
    .addService("/admin",
                new HttpServiceBinder(adminService).bindings())
    .addService("/protocols", 
                new OidcProtocolBinder(new OidcProtocolServiceImpl()).bindings())
    .addInterceptor("/", new BasicExceptionInterceptor())
    .build();
```

In this case, the HttpServiceBinder is annotation driven. Programmers would markup the interface of AdminService and the binder would take care of marshalling arguments to methods and serializing the response. HttpServiceBinder produces bindings, a mapping of Routes to Endpoints where an endpoint takes an HttpRequest and returns an HttpResponse. The Binder wraps adminService methods with functions that marshal HttpRequests into method invocations and serialize responses into an HttpResponse.

Meanwhile, the OidcProtocolBinder has the same responsibility: produce bindings. The difference with these bindings is that they are hand-coded instead of being dynamically created based on annotations to the OidcProtocolService. 

The nice thing about having this seperation is that I can make the annotation-based binder opinionated while leaving an escape hatch for special scenarios. If your service interface doesn't follow the DynamicBinder's prescription, you can always drop back to full control using the HttpAdapter interface.

I spent the afternoon putting together the binders and refactoring the code to accept them. Overall, I'm happy with the result. In my integration tests, I can query a dummy service which is dressed up all gaudy with annotations.

```java
@Service
@Path("/entities")
public interface EntityService {

    @Path(method = "put", value = "/{id}")
    @ResponseCode(201)
    Entity putEntity(
            @PathParam("id") UUID id,
            @Body Entity entity
    );

    @Path(method = "get")
    List<Entity> listEntities(
            @QueryParam("filter") String filter,
            @QueryParam("pageSize") Integer pageSize,
            @QueryParam("pageToken") String pageToken
    );
}
```

Next time I work on this, maybe I'll actually get to working on the application code instead of just the frameworky code. 
