---
layout: post
title:  "log: writing an oauth server"
date:   2019-08-11 01:00:00 -0800
categories: work
draft: false
short: Writing a hobby oauth server. Taleb-esque flaneur style.
---

_This post is 99% jargon and is meaningless to those fortunate not to have been brain damaged by learning Java._

I'm building an OAuth2.0 authorization server. My goal is to act like a Taleb-style flaneur: write in a way that gives me the most pleasure. Focus on what is most interesting, and skip the boring parts. It may mean that I never get to actually implementing the oauth server but that's ok. The goal is to learn something more than produce a product.

Where to start?

I already know auth2.0 at a high level. I've read the RFC and parts of related standards like OIDC. I've also had to work with Keycloak, an oauth2.0 server written with RedHat's bundle of frameworks: hibernate, Jboss, Wildfly, etc, etc. It's an absolute beast that has a million bells and whistles. The thing is dauntingly complex. My goal is not to be Keycloak. My goal is to be simple, streamlined, and to the point. I'm only interested in a few oauth flows.

I'm only interested in managing a few entity types. I will not address anything I'm not interested in. Therefore, I don't want to get involved with a heavy-weight ORM, but I do think I'll use a relational database. Tools like jdbi come to mind here: just enough sugar over a database connection to make programming pleasurable while not becoming abstract to complete opacity.

Another goal is speed. I want the app to be performant. I do not want a 7 second start up time like for SpringBoot on my mac pro. I think this will lead to writing most of the web frame-worky stuff myself.

I also don't want to have to visit stackoverflow to answer questions about frameworks. Much of my early days with Spring were looking for monkey patch fixes for things like "serialize json snake case", "log hibernate query arguments", "prometheus adapter spring boot 2.0 not working". You get the idea. Basically, it's the overwhelming, distasteful, complex thing about frameworks that one of the Django creators [explains better than I can][django].

**Goals**

1. write what is interesting, focus is learning
2. write for performance because performance is pleasurable

What are the major components of an app like this?

## Decision: Language

My go to options are either Java or Python. I've written several Spring apps and a few small Flask apps.

I spent a while researching patterns for developing flask apps and ultimately got bored reading about frameworks and all the cool bells and whistles they offer. Then I remembered that I had always wanted to try writing a web server on plain Netty (as opposed to grpc over netty). So I decided that Java and Netty it is.

By the way, yes, Netty is a framework: it calls you. That's OK. It's fast so it meets the speed criteria. And I don't care for learning about handling sockets, so I needn't re-implement a server on top of NIO right now (but maybe in a future project). Plus, I still get to assemble the app in a straightforward imperative way (so long as I don't reinvent injection).

## Decision: Container / DI Framework

Things I don't want to deal with:
- autowiring
- beans
- scanning

I just want to write imperative builders to wire up my app (much like the set up for a grpc server in Java). Maybe I'll use some lightweight injection framework in the future. But in the beginning, the app is small and I don't need this.

Goodbye Spring.

## Decision: Persistence

The first is that I need persistence. Using a relational database seems like a natural choice to store a couple of entity types with different relations between them. However, that then raises the question of whether to use an ORM or just use SQL with some kind of lightweight library on top of that. I had the most fun when I wrote using Java with a small library called "jdbi" because it was pretty transparent as to what it was doing. I think I will do this.

## Decision: Layering

The service layer will be responsible for retrieving models from the repo classes. The models serve as data structures. The service performs operations on models. Services are wired into the routing library. The routing library is responsible for passing requests from netty to the correct service method. Handlers within the router are responsible for preparing the input such that the service can consume it. The service should not know that it is being invoked as part of an http call.

Here's the sketch I made while thinking about this:

```
netty  <-RspCtx ReqCtx-> Binder <-POJOs  POJOs-> Repo <- POJO  SQL ->
             router                  service
```

Don't study it too hard, basically a doodle.

# Implementation: Routing

By routing, I mean take a http style path and method and turn it into a method invocation. It also involves to steps along the way like pulling out path variables and intercepting exceptions.

I spent the majority of the day working on routing. I wrote up some potential routes to get a sense of what features my routing classes would need to support.

```
POST    /protocols/oidc/token

GET     /admin/clients
POST    /admin/clients
GET     /admin/clients/{id}
DELETE  /admin/clients/{id}
POST    /admin/clients/{id}
GET     /admin/clients/{id}/sessions

GET     /app/metrics
```

Okay, so roughly I'll have a big tree of routing nodes where some of the routing nodes are wrapped in decorators which do things like handling exceptions and maybe authentication when I need that.

Here's another sketch I made while implementing the router to visualize what I needed to assemble from a list of routes and methods.

```
Node("/")
    admin -> Node(admin)
                clients -> Node(clients)
                              GET -> handler
                              POST -> handler
                              {id} -> Node({id})
                                        GET -> handler
                                        DELETE -> handler
```

# So, what happened?

I ended up implementing the router this weekend. I discovered a few things. One, I automatically grabbed a classpath scanning library and implemented a crude version of component scanning because I thought I needed that. Heavy Spring indoctrination. I snapped to my senses when I looked at the code on Sunday morning and realized that all I needed was a server builder, something like GRPC's:

```
Server.builder()
   .addService(new ClientService(..))
   .addInterceptor(new ExceptionHandler(..))
   .build()
   .start();
```

No more of this approach.

```
Server.builder()
   .scanPackages("com.cramja")
   .bindToAppContext(appContext)
   .build()
   .start();
```

I am curious to see at what point the project will require dependency injection. I didn't hit that point this weekend.

I enjoyed implementing the router. It is a deep component. That is, a lot of functionality is in one place. One sacrifice I did have to make was having the router be mutable. It'd be really nice if I could make it an immutable data structure like the ones in functional languages. Maybe that could be a flaneur-esque enhancement.

I didn't get to writing the service code. As far as I can tell, the router needs a little more polish. Next weekend might be the time to do this.

Anyways, that's all for now. I may put the code up publicly, but if I never do, it's because I'm narcissistically hording the codez.

Will there be a part 2? Probably not, but who knows.

[django]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvOsegaN9Wk
