---
layout: post
title: "Notes on Cast Iron"
date:   2021-02-13 00:00:00
categories: writing
short: I have a few cast iron pans and have, at times, obsessed over using them correctly. These are my notes on cast iron selection and maintenance.
---

I use cast iron pans enough to where I learned how to maintain them, and observed a few differences in the kinds of pans you can find out there. 

Although somewhat tempermental (they can rust, and require special care) cast irons are durable, functional pieces of kitchen equipment, and can become collector's item if kept in your kitchen drawers long enough. I was gifted a Wagner brand pan of which I do not know its specific origin but the [wikipedia entry for Wagner](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wagner_Manufacturing_Company) explains that the company went under during the 1950s. Looking around at my immediate surrounding, I wouldn't be surprised if that pan is the oldest thing I own. It's certainly the oldest thing that I use regularly to accomplish something useful such as cooking bacon.

## Physical Attributes

### Weight

_In general, heavier is better_

A heavy pan will absorb more heat and dampen fluctuations from the heat source, allowing you to more evenly cook your food.

Cast iron has relatively high energy density which makes them ideal for cooking over irregular sources of heat. Maybe you don't frequently cook over raging campfires on windy days, but even domestic appliances like my electric range have some variability (electric ranges cycle on and off to achieve medium heat settings). Rapidly changing temperatures can burn or unevenly cook your dish, so the ability to dampen variance in temperature is important. One option for controlling variance is to use cookware with a high energy density. You'd intuitively know that if you took an aluminum and an iron pan out of a hot oven at the same time, that a minute later, it'd be safer to touch the aluminum pan. Iron stores more heat energy than aluminum which means that it will take longer to change temperature as the heat source changes. Therefore, the heavier and more energy-dense your pan, the better it will be at evenly cooking your food by controlling for fluxuations in the heat source.

I have three pans at my current residence, all with slightly differing geometries, differing weights, but similar diameters.

- 2.3kg Lodge pan. It's not mine and I've not used it, but it can be [purchased on Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Lodge-Skillet-Pre-Seasoned-10-25-Inch-Silicone/dp/B00WTSCXIS/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=lodge+pan&qid=1613267397&sr=8-1) for 30$ at time of writing and it seems formidable.
- 2.0kg for the Wagner that I use frequently. It does feel like a quality pan and the weight seems to justify this intuition.
- 1.8kg for a Mainstays (walmart) brand that I bought for seven dollars while in school.

The qualitative difference that I can find between the Wagner and Mainstays pan is that heat seems to reach the edges of the Wagner pan better on my electric range which has a smaller diameter than the pan itself.

### Surface Texture

_even surface textures_

Texture of the pan surface seems to effect how well the seasoning (a coat of polymerized fat) sticks to the surface. My cheaper pan has varying levels of roughness on the cooking surface of the pan. One area near the handle is smooth while the rest of the cooking surface has texture. When I lightly scour the pan to clean it, the seasoning wears faster on the smooth area, leaving a permanently uneven coating on the pan. Therefore, an even texture is preferable.

_smooth versus sandy_

Most cast irons are made in a process called sand casting wherein hot metal is poured into sand molds. The texture of the pan will reflect this: rough but not terribly so. Some pans I've encountered have very smooth surfaces which I suspect makes them better at being non-stick. Howeer, I have not actually found one to purchase and use so cannot attest to this. It may be possible to polish the surface of a sand cast pan, but I have not tried this yet.

## Seasoning

Seasoning is a layer of polymerized fat that forms a non-stick coating over the surface of cookware. This layer is semi-durable: it will survive light soap and a hand scouring for cleanup but can be scratched by sharp utensils or caustic cleaning methods. 

Unlike teflon, you can easily regenerate seasoning in your home. As you cook with the pan, you will generally build up layers of seasoning (since cast iron cooking generally involves fatty meats like steak, burgers, or bacon which naturally shed their fat in the pan). You can purposefully build up seasoning by coating the pan in a thin film of oil and then heating it for some time. I generally do this in the oven but some people do it on their stovetop as well.


### Technique

Apply a very light coat of oil all over every surface of the pan using a rag or paper towel. Place upside down in a 500F oven for about an hour. Remove, let cool until warm, apply another layer and repeat until you're happy with the result.

_Tips_

- You're using too much oil if the pan has a pock-marked surface when you remove it.

- You're not letting it cook long enough if the pan has a slightly sticky feeling when cooled.

### Fat Choice

I have experimented with two kinds of oil.

- Canola oil. It's common, cheap, and works well as a seasoning oil. In fact, Canola will even polymerize at room temperature. If you're like me and don't use very much Canola but spill oil on the sides of the bottle when you do, then six months later the bottle will stick to your hands as you grab it. The spilled oil slowly and partially polymerized, becoming sticky.

- Bacon grease. I'd not recommend this. I think my collected bacon grease had impurities in it because the final coating was uneven and splotchy. It could also be that I was using too much in a single session.

The internet suggests to use all different kinds of oils, especially flax oil.

### Reseasoning

You may have a pan that's rusty or has a thick layer of old seasoning and carbon built up on the cooking surface. You can reset the pan by removing the old layers and starting from scratch. I tried two different methods on pans that I've restored after abusing them for years. The internet suggests an abundance of methods ranging from chemical (exposure to strong bases like over cleaners) to electric (running a current through the pan while in a solution), but I opted for methods that were low risk, and easy to set up.

1. An electric drill + wirebrush attachment. This works well but requires a lot of downward pressure as you're scraping off layers. It's also difficult to hold the pan in place since the drill will naturally want to rotate the pan. I only removed the seasoning from the flat surface of my pans, and for that it worked OK.

2. Vinegar soak and scouring pads. This did not work well. The seasoning only partially dissolved and became sticky as I attempted to scour it. I had a hard time removing the black tar from my fingers. I gave up and used the first method.


Fin
