---
layout: post
title:  "Distributed AI"
date:   2015-01-20 12:17:18 -0600
categories: tech
short: As part of an independent study project, I am going to be writing a few posts describing some of my research on distributed AI as well as crafting some demo projects to show off some of the practicalities of this topic.
---

As part of an independent study project, I am going to be writing a few posts describing some of my research on distributed AI as well as crafting some demo projects to show off some of the practicalities of this topic.

Distributed AI encompasses many types of AI systems. To label a system as distributed AI, it must have multiple agents. In fact, the definition of agent is not set in stone but usually means something like, "a system situated in an environment where it tries to achieve design objects," You and I are both agents. In fact, even if you're a computer-program who is screen scraping this website, you too are an agent! However, though both human readers and robot scrapers are distributed agents, a group of humans is a much more complex agent study. Humans communicate in a decentralized manner where as web-scrapers report to a single source. Furthermore, web scrapers do not take their own interests into account when communicating, they simply report their results to a database according to their instructions. A more complex agent like a human reader has a much more complicated processing function. We humans take our emotional/physical/mental state into account as well as the past history of similar interactions and their remembered outcomes. This function plays a larger role when socializing, solving abstract problems, foraging, etc.

Modeling human intelligence is not in the scope of a ten week study, so I will be modeling simpler interactions. One class of simple interactions is the study of artificial life (AL). AL involves creating simulations that model aspects of biology, attempting to recreate some physical phenomenon through evolution, competition, and chance. <i>Chance</i> is a simple yet important element of AL because it is necessary component of our universe. What doesn't have some element of chance? You're right, deterministic systems! Systems like my favorite AL, Conway's Game of Life. It's a deterministic simulation which can easily be made into a non-deterministic one by adding a chance factor into each iteration.

Game of Life is a simple cellular automata. Agents are individual cells in a 2D grid who are either dead or alive. At each time interval, a square examines its neighbors, and depending on the number of dead or alive neighbors, it will live or die. It takes inspiration from a cell culture: too many cells in one area and the cells die from accumulated waste and over competition. Too few cells and the cells die from inability to reproduce. Interestingly, this simulation is more complex than just being apparently random patterns. The sorts of patterns which appear in game of life can be structurally stable, and capable of replicating themselves. In fact, Game of Life is Turing Complete. This means that anything which is computable can be computed using Game of Life. This doesn't mean that Microsoft Windows is going to be rewritten into Game of Life (in theory it could), but it may find more immediate use in the area of cryptography. 

I promised that I would show how a deterministic system can be made into a stochastic one. There are many ways we could introduce randomness but the simplest one might be to add a probability that a cell will flip states during a turn regardless of the state of its neighbors. Click the button below to load the game and try it for yourself.

[Sorry, that button no longer exists. I took it out when I moved my website :(]
