---
layout: post
title:  "Writing"
date:   2016-06-01 12:17:18 -0600
categories: writing
short: I have an information heavy diet and for as much as I consume, it feels right to produce something.
---
Sometimes I feel like I have to write. Or, more generally, produce. I have an information heavy diet and for as much as I consume, it feels right to produce *something*. Like how in the evenings I sit down and try to read a big fat book, and as I chew away at it, I find my mind feeling comfortably full and then, reading more, bloated with the information. It's not as absorbed when read in large portions. On a whole, I don't think things are absorbed in large portions, or assimilated until they have been kneaded through in conversation, writing, coding, or even just thinking while staring up at the ceiling.

As the stoic philosopher Seneca wrote, "no new findings will be discovered if we rest content with the teachings of the past." I think we should make an effort to produce for ourselves for the reason that it digests the knowledge and assimilates it in the similar way the the body digests food and assimilates it. Our struggles with our own creative works force us to process information and challenge our comfortable assumptions we so nicely ally with in our thoughts. Even if these thoughts and ideas have already been implemented or tried by others, we still gain from having worked through the problem ourselves.



When it comes to hard problems, I find that my mind is a near-sighted romantic. It tends to simplify complex ideas and then become fond of the idea of beautiful complexity. On approaching the idea from a probing, methodical state of mind, the idea becomes ugly, littered, tangled as the working with an idea and trying to produce reveals that what I really know about it is marginal in comparison to what my romantic side thinks I know about the idea. 

Forcing yourself to implement your ideas is a possible antidote to this blind romanticism. Often times when I program, I have this beautiful idea in my mind of how the program should be structured, and will play nicely with easily separable components. There will be no global state, the standard OO design patters will nicely fit into the framework of the problem, the variables will be so intuitively named that no comments will be needed, and that the pretty design I have planned out on day one will be the design when finished. Then the experience of actually implementing the project brings me back into a reality of shared state, hair-pully bugs, muddled inheritance hierarchies, and unclear responsibilities of classes. Blah, it's frustrating as a romantic perfectionist, but as long as it works, right? Not only that, but the experience of breaking down the problem and stirring up your assumption is good. We need to challenge the perfectionist so that it doesn't hold us back from taking the messy way for fear that it might not work, or worse, that it might not be perfect.

To tell you the truth, I am writing this now with very little idea of what I wanted to start out writing. Reading Seneca this morning, I was inspired to go forth and actually create something for myself, even if it was just a few words after dinner, and even if it did not match up to the simple, solid examples in similes as Seneca writes. For, if when sitting all day at the computer and then developing a sore back, one should probably reconsider why they are abusing their spine and then go make arrangements to find a more comfortable way of working the day. Or, at the very least, taking a walk after work would be some consultation, better than having done nothing, or even worse, thinking about the solution but not actually implementing it. For me, this writing is that kind of consultation, enough to help process the words of Seneca.

Or maybe just to feel good about putting another one of these blog style articles up on the web. Who knows? 