---
layout: post
title:  "Still Fasting"
date:   2016-03-05 05:17:18 -0600
categories: health
short: Do you want to read about someone who got chiseled abs, a ripped body, and an overgrown ego? Well, then, this might not fit the bill because all I'm writing about is the nuts and bolts of not eating in the morning.
---

As I said before, not eating is great. You don't have to cook, you don't have to clean up, and you don't have to buy food for the meals you skip. Fasting gives your body time to devote resources to tasks besides digestion which means that when your gut quiets down, different systems might start clean up or growth processes. There's evidence that fasting can trigger anti-cancer processes in the body, as well as trigger bursts of growth hormone. Both those things sound like pretty powerful benefits of something which cost so little.

Actually, that would be an interesting study- to keep track of exactly what I eat for a week and then post in a table. That would make the blog post a little more interesting. Let's try that!

TODO insert list of groceries/prices/things

**I have changed how I do IF since January when I started.**

## Fatty Coffee

Because I started to lose weight, I started to on week days to drink a blend of butter, coconut oil, and coffee. It sounds like cheating right? Fasting should mean no food, no calories. The cheat here is that fatty coffee has no protien or carbohydrates in it so many normal digestion processes are avoided. Further, blended oil forms micro-globules which supposidely are very quickly and effiecently absorbed by the gut, making it a very low-overhead food to eat. And when considering that fat packs 9 calories per gram, it's not hard to get a full-sized breakfast from a few scoops of oil.

That said, I save this blend for days when I feel like I need an extra boost, like on days where I got less sleep than I would like or when I wake up feeling a persistant emptiness (something akin to hunger pangs but more of a deeper, long term stateful feeling versus an impulsive grab-something-from-the-fridge urge). This morning, I don't feel the need, so it's quite nice not to have to spend the extra few minutes preping.

So blending, how does that work? What I learned was that using a blender in a small apartment at 6am is not good for roommate relations. So, I bought a tiny milk frother on Amazon for 15 bucks. It's close to silent, and works just as well as the mighty blender for turning solid butter into an acceptable morning beverage.

Also, I threw up the first time I had fatty coffee for breakfast. I guess my belly was not ready to handle pure fat first thing in the morning. I googled around and it's something about how much bile your system produces. Bile helps to digest fat, and bile production fluxuates based on, among other things, your eating patterns. So I stepped back from a tablespoon of butter and coconut oil to only a teaspoon of oil and worked my way up to now where I can eat a stick of butter like a Snickers. 

## Lentils

Fuck lentils. They cause me so many problems and yet I continue to cook with them because they're cheap, they taste alright with rice and vegetables, and hopefully no cows were torchured and slaughted in relation to my meal.

Yeah, so problems. If I have lentils for dinner, I notice symptons the next morning. I'm talking about hot feeling in the gut, a feeling of heaviness in the stomach, and an overall body feeling of being mildy sick. It goes away by about 3 in the afternoon. OI've eaten lentils in the past but one of the reasons I think I have noticed it now for the first time is that fasting in the morning makes you more aware of yourself. Not having a morning meal might give you more mental resources to pay attention to what your whole body is saying.

Well, what the hell? Why should a health food make me feel sick? Google that shit and you'll learn about these chemicals called lechtins. They're a class of plant hormones which, among other things, help to deter preditors by making their stomachs hurt. In fact, if you eat too many of them, they can damage the lining of your small intestine, pushing the cells apart, and allowing food particels, bacteria, and other crap to be absorbed by your body. This is called 'leaky gut,' a term which I like for the images of plumbing which it can't help but evoke. 

So if it is the lechins, what to do about it?

I tried sprouting the lentils. Basically, soak them and then continue to rinse and drain them every day until the tails sprout. Then cook them normally. This didn't help, still felt leaky. Next I'm going to buy a pressure cooker and blast the fuck out of them because apparently that's one way to assuridly solve the problem. 

Many indian students who I work with confirmed that they use a pressure cooker. For a gringo, this is sort of an exotic kitchen implement, but so is buying a milk frother for butter coffee so I have no excuses.

## Meditation

Hey, guess what. You stop eating and suddenly you want to start waking up at 4 am and meditating.

Actually, I did a 2 week stint of waking up between 4:30 and 5 and meditating for a half hour. I used an app called `mindroid` which plays tones which supposidly help with focus and getting your brain to wind down into a state of deep meditation.

To be fair though, the biggest thing for the quality of the meditation which I had noticed was what I had for dinner the night before and if I could get up early enough. If I had gut-puncturing lentils, then I was less likely to get into a deep state of focus. If I got up at say, 5:30 instead of 4:30, then there would be more noises from the neighbors, and random monkey-mind thoughts to pull my focus away.

The thing is though, I committed myself to 2 weeks of this, but now that those 2 weeks are over, I don't think I will continue because lack of sleep seriously impairs my ability to program, write, and be excited around people.

However, I still want to find a way to make it work, because, like fasting, it is free and has positive externalities.

## Conclusion

Fasting continues to be a win.

