---
layout: post
title:  "Giving Up Healthy Habits"
date:   2016-02-06 10:37:16 -0600
categories: exercise
short: I move from obsession to obsession. Luckily my last obsession taught me not to obsess over my obsessions.
---
I move from obsession to obsession. Luckily my last obsession taught me not to obsess over my obsessions.

To be straight my last obsession was a low grade chemical addiction to the endorphins provided by long distance running. I ran ultra marathons during my Sophomore and Junior year of undergraduate and spent many of my weeks in the 70-80 mile per week zone. I don't regret it. Ultra-running can bring refined states of zen. And it was fun. 

What I didn't understand at the time, is that running is a catabolic process. This means that it breaks your body down. Like, imagine you took your car, or your neighbor's car on a fork lift and lifted it up in the air an inch or two, and plopped it down again. If your car has at least as good as suspension as mine does (and it likely does) it would be visibly fine after the fall. There might be a microscopic impact, but on the macro, human-visible level, everything is fine. Now, repeat the dropping process for the next hour and a half. Little stresses will start to distort pieces of metal, maybe even the frame of the car. Little problems tend to accelerate into bigger problems. If the somewhat flexible metal frame of your car gets a little bent, that my be fine, but quickly the brittle glass will splinter under repeated beatings. This doesn't sound like something you'd want to do to your car, however, it might be interesting to watch the process unfold in your neighbor's car. I'm not sure if dropping a car on pavement is exactly similar to the effect of dropping a human frame on the pavement but the point is catabolism is bad in some cases. With your car, you'll need to buy a new one. Unfortunately, you cannot buy a new body at this point in time, and so it's best not to break the one you have. Of course, unlike the car, we get this amazing self-regenerating capsule for our consciousness called the human body. If we give it rest after a beating, it will actually get stronger. What the fuck, that's awesome. Like, imagine if driving your car fast today made it faster when take it out tomorrow.

Catabolism during meaningful exercise is inevitable and is positive. In fact, to a certain degree it is what makes exercise meaningful. Hard workouts push your muscles beyond their capacity. This stress causes them to over compensate for the damage *in proportion to the amount which they were stressed*. I emphasize this last part because it's the part that took me three years of endurance running to figure out.

If you're like me, you exercise more because you want something out of exercise. I want a lean and strong body. I'm aware from conventional wisdom that exercise brings these things. However conventional wisdom will not tell you how to get these things most effectively. If, unlike my undergraduate self, you're smart, then you'll take these goals and research the least time consuming and most effective way to achieve these goals. Hint: endurance running does not achieve all these goals or achieve them effectively.

Don't believe me? Good, I wouldn't have either when I was in the running mindset. Though, I might have at least read the abstract to [this](link) study from a Canadian physiologist who showed that runners who sprinted once a week for 30 minutes had more performance gains than runners who trained endurance style for over four hours that week.

Still don't believe me? Yep, I wouldn't have either. Actually, it's not that I wouldn't have not believed the study, I simply would have found it too difficult to implement. Ridiculously, the first time I saw the study was while I was training for an ultra marathon by doing 80 mile weeks. Running formed a powerful grip on me. It infected my daily habits. Running provided a framework for my week without me having to think too hard about what I really wanted to accomplish that week. I knew I had to get up at a certain time, drink water, put shoes on, and get out the door. After that, everything was easy. Shower, eat, class, work, sleep. Limit drinking, don't stay out late, eat healthy foods. Besides, providing life's rules, investing that much energy into running sapped my energy to the point were there wasn't hardly any left over to invest into negative things like angst. 

Running was more than just a thing I did in the mornings, it became religiously important. 

Running gave me an easy way out in my decision making processes. At night, if I was at a pub and people were going to someone's place to wind down, I could excuse myself effortlessly because I was a devotee of running and had to be up for my morning ritual. If I was invited out to get pizza with some friends I didn't know too well, I could avoid the social anxiety with an excuse that I was going to stay home and cook and study because I was 'training' and on a specific diet, and needed to catch up on studies, etc, etc. Running became an out 

Running provided a social sphere. You get to know the other people who are just as devoted as you are and they become your friends. Some of the strongest friendships I made were forged on long runs in the countryside. Breathless conversations in a natural setting somehow trick the brain into encoding them strongly into your memories.