---
layout: post
title:  "Clutch"
date:   2016-06-27 12:17:18 -0600
categories: writing
short: Part of an email correspondance about automotive repair.
---
Carroll-

I promised an update about the corolla. I took it to a mechanic who drove it around, felt the sticky first gear and told me that it was likely bad synchros, and that the cost of repairing would be more than the value of the car. Bummer, but he told me that his (also mechanic) dad's car does the same thing and that it's more of a nuisance than anything. So, no plans to fix the sticky first gear.


Now, unrelated to the transmission issue, I tried to drive to San Jose this Saturday and the car wouldn't start. Not even attempting to turn over. I took this as a bad omen and canceled my errand. However, maybe I should have been more scientific, remembering that it did this last summer. I was stranded in Moline Illinois, luckily with a friend whose father owned two camery's and offered to help me change the starter, a problem he identified. Previously, I did not know that that there is a tiny motor that spins the big motor just enough so it can begin firing in sequence. So we spend an impossibly humid midwest night in the garage, tearing the car apart, snapping bolts, and finally got the new starter installed midmorning the next day. Still didn't start. Then I locate a blown fuse, happening to be the one that connects the starter solenoid- a small electro-mechanical switch which engages the main starter circuit. We replaced it and immediately the car cranks to life. That was last July.

So this time, about a year later, my car won't start. I think that I'm so much smarter now so I replace the blown fuse, and turn the key, annnd nothing. I blow one more fuse this way just to make sure. Defeated, I conclude that my car simply eats starter motors and, lacking the good fortune of being stranded with an amateur mechanic, I give up. I'll call a tow truck on monday and pay the proper price an ignorant consumer should pay to get their car fixed.

Well, last night my host family (and also my landlords (I'm renting a storage room in the back of their house (Silicon valley life))) get back from a party and, in his jovial inebriated state, Rich suggested that roll start the car and then drive it into the drive way. He said, likely the starter is fine and that really, the solenoid circuit has shorted. The way to fix it is to jostle the wires and hit the starter motor a few times with a big metal stick. So first, it was magic to me that I could start the car without turning the key. In a manual car, I guess you can roll the car about three miles an hour in a parking lot. If the engine is spinning fast enough, you can push in the clutch, and the now freely spinning engine will be going fast enough to start. Voodoo. So when I was able to push it down the parking lot and then jump in, push in and out the clutch and it jumped to life, I got a little scared now understanding that I know nothing about cars.

The next part was equally revealing of my ignorance. Rich explained that to diagnose the problem, you can isolate parts of the circuit. So we started by unplugging the starter motor and then putting a new fuse in. If, when turning the key, the fuse blows, then the short is upstream of the motor. Okay reasonable, non-voodoo. Actually that sounds like the testing procedures I do all the time while working in a large codebase: take something out, see if the problem is still occurring. So we do that, and the fuse doesn't die which teaches us that the problem is related to the motor itself. Now, the voodoo. We take a crowbar and tap on the starter, then jostle the wires leading up to the starter. After plugging it back in, music to my ears, the car roars to life without the need of a push start.

I am grateful for all the knowledge I've picked up here and there about cars, an experience only made available because I had bought a buggy car. However, now I have to wonder- what if last July in Moline, we had whacked the starter a few times and put a new fuse in? I guess that's just will just remain one of the great mysteries of life.

Cheers,
Marc
