---
layout: post
title:  "Experiments with phenibut"
date:   2016-03-05 05:17:18 -0600
categories: writing
short: I bought a supplement called Phenibut. Russians discovered that this stuff is great for anxiety and concentration. I discovered that they're right.
---

So what is this stuff called *phenibut*? I'd never heard of it or the chemical from which it is composed. Phenibut is a salt form of GABA, a neurotransmitter which is responsible, among other things, for calming you the \*\*\*\* down. You can also find pure GABA on the internet but phenibut is much better absorbed by the brain than is pure GABA.

## Background

The first time I had heard about GABA was from a [radiolab][1] podcast where they referenced an experiment on rats. These guys were given probiotics in the form of yogurt which increased the amounts of GABA piped up from the gut and into the brain. The rats were then thrown into a bucket of water to test their response to stress because, similar to humans, they don't like being thrown against their will into a pool which they cannot leave. 

As you might guess, the control group freaked out. They panicked, clawed at the walls of the bucket for 4 minutes before giving up and going into a dead man's float. The GABA rats? They swam peacefully around the edges of the bucket for long enough that the experimenters got bored and stopped the experiment. As part of the experiment, the vagus nerve of the GABA rats (the pipe which takes GABA and other chemical signals from the gut to the brain) was severed and the stress experiment repeated. These formerly serene GABA rats became just as panic-y as their control brothers. Poor guys.

So they concluded that there was a connection between the gut biome and mental states, and that GABA was a key chemical agent in this relationship.

Well, yeah, I haven't tried throwing myself into a bucket of water, or severing my vagus nerve, but I have experimented with taking 500mg doses of phenibut from this [site][2]. *note: phenibut can cause dependencies. Take it once a week and you won't have trouble. Take it like a fiend and sorry my friend but you'll screw up your brain.*

## Experience

When I started experimenting with it, I took it twice a week on days where I had a lot of focus-intensive work to do (I work on database systems, and systems don't write themselves, yet). I noticed an increased ability to focus and not to give into the monkey-mind. That is, less distractions bubbling up from the random parts of the brain saying to get on reddit, check email, blah, blah don't do work. 

That's great right? Well, I'm not too happy with the instructions that the supplement came labeled with. The bottle said you could take up to 4 daily. Holy shit, taking just one I can feel the power, so four sounds abusive or at least medicinal in the case of someone who needs some kind of intervention. The package also came with a warning saying not to take for more than 2 days in a row without a day's break in between usages. The package did not explain that as you take GABA supplements, your brain down regulates the amount of GABA it produces. Therefore, if you go cold turkey after taking 4 pops a day for a several weeks, you're going to feel awful and possibly need hospitalization. 

**So, dear readers, should you try phenibut?** 

Yes if you like experimenting, but to be honest, I don't think I would use this as anything but a once and a while tool.

## Use Cases

For example, I have an old, cheap car. When you drive it at 80 down the freeway, it's noisy. I turn on the stereo to full blast to try to overcome the wind. However, this constant level of noise is stressful. I've measured my heart rate (a stress indicator) while driving, and it's consistently 10-15 beats above my normal, sitting down heart rate rate. After driving for 2-3 hours, I get to my destination feeling sort of blasted and wired like I'm stuck in a flight-or-fight mode. Even after an hour-long walk, I usually still feel twitchy and restless.

Now let's say I take a phenibut three hours before the same drive. Same level of focus on the road, but now, the background awareness of stressful noise is turned down. It's like the brain doesn't absorb the negative input, making you impervious. I haven't measured my heart rate during one of these drives, but if I do, I will update this post with the results. A non-chemical solution would be to reduce the amount of noise. I could wear noise canceling headphones but that would block out the noise of cars passing, and possibly be dangerous. I could get a better insulated car, but I don't have the cash, plus I like my car.

## Alternatives

There's plenty of ways you can learn to reduce stress, but if you're looking to directly alter the amount of GABA which your body is producing, do what the experimenters did to the rats. You can eat foods which increase the amount of GABA producing bacteria in your gut. So, you'll find sauerkraut, kimchi, and green vegetables in my GABA-aware diet. I also make a concerted efforts not to sever my vagus nerve.

Specific to the driving issue, I have found that driving while fasting is another trick which reduces road stress. You simply have less energy to spend stressing about traffic and the noise around you. It's actually easier to stay focused on driving because you're not distracted by needing to flip channels on the radio, think about flicking off that driver that passed you on the right, and all the other joys of the road.

## Conclusion

Phenibut is something I will keep around in my medicine cabinet. It is a useful tool, but because it can be dependency-creating, I am not making this part of my routine.

[1]: http://www.radiolab.org/story/197242-gut-feelings/
[2]: https://www.a1supplements.com/sns-phenibut-xt
