---
layout: post
title:  "Cavities"
date:   2018-02-25 12:00:00 -0600
categories: writing
draft: false
short: Working with a mouth full of cavities.
---

Three weeks back, I discovered that I have a cavity. I was brushing my teeth and had the curiosity to shine my phone's flashlight into my mouth. To my surprise there was dark spot in the crevice of a molar.

Was it really to my surprise though? Since joining a Highly Innovative and Influential Silicon Valley Software startup, I have been snacking on all manner of organic oatmeal sugar bars, stick-to-your teeth raisin and m&m candy trail mix, and coffee coffee coffee. And, because this is all free, and dispensed at close proximity to the area where I work, I may munch all day. This is to the dismay of not only my pancreas, which I am told must secrete a steady stream of sugar-countering insulin, but, more visibility at the moment my poor poor teeth. The snacking provides the acid-producing bacterial residents of my mouth with a constant holiday of sweet, sugar-laden saliva. What faster route is there to destroying my teeth, save, maybe a rock pick? The point is, I am totally at fault for the destruction of my one and only pair of teeth.

It's a consequence of my lack of self control around an abundant and free resource that I was not otherwise used to. In school, the sugar that I would consume was limited to the rare occasion where a senior grad student had left dissertation goodies in the lounge, _and_ I had seen announcement email prior to the hundreds of other depraved students. Rarer still, the times when I had an emotion-driven lapse into indulgence on Babcock's ice cream they sold at the union. Granted, there were many times when I'd be stuck on a problem, have a burst of self-pity, and take my weakness out for a walk for ice cream. About five minutes into the walk, I'd find that I no longer had the same manic desire for sweets. Instead I'd just continue on for another ten minutes and a stop to the water fountain. This clearly illustrates that the way I could have chosen to solve the problem of my rotten teeth would be to situate my desk three blocks away from the office.

Seeing that I haven't yet gained the kind of reputation that would allow me to vacate my position at my claimed seat in our Highly Innovative Open Floor Plan, I settled for a a method of radical discipline. I was so fraught, that I vowed to give up sugar, nay, all carbohydrates, for an undefined period. This forced ketogenic diet is totally in response to my inner disgust that I could ferment such bacterially destructive brew in my own mouth. I was ignorantly wrecking my health while working.

Of course, the dentist was and still is an option. But, let me tell you, if I ran away from my own guilt, and the agency which I have in the problem, then I am no closer to solving it. I must suffer the shame of looking at that cavity. It's wrong to immediately schedule an appointment to have it drilled out and patched with some American Dental Associated Approved totally-non-toxic dental chemical concoction. I must not give into the standard fix-the-symptom not the root of the problem mentality which plagues our modern chronic conditions thinking. Instead, I have to admit that I know that I am the root cause of my dental problems (and many more personal deficiencies that I'm not yet willing to admit). 

Therefore, the last thing I will do is go to the dentist. I will wait out the proper six month term the American Dental Association has approved as the right amount of time that we must take out between the fluoridation, and irradiation treatments of a dental cleaning. 

I will wait out my time taking the best possible care of my teeth and do so as nature intended: to not eat modernistic shit. So that means no more sugar. No more white breads, no more candies, no more sugar sodas, no more non-sugar sodas, no more beer (for now). More importantly, it means eating what's natural, and ancient. This means meats, eggs, cheese (my ancestors were European lactose-tolerant-types), and a daily dose of vegetables. If I stay away from the carb-y vegetables, this diet ends up being ketogenic, which means I can throw a little fasting into the mix, and boom, I basically have the Mr. Bulletproof Silicon Valley Super CEO diet right there. But, I'm not doing to be some kind of super hero ultra-productive futurist. I'm doing it so I don't rot out my teeth. 

Plus, I want a six pack. Who doesn't want a six pack?

I'll wear this cavity until I feel the fear of the destruction of my body has worn off. Or my biannual dental cleaning appointment, whichever comes first. 

The point is, I should wear the reminder that I am currently responsible for my health, and I am currently receiving a failing mark. 
